Syllabus
OL 565: Business Risk
2026
Professor:
Edward M. Smith, Ph.D.
E-mail: Ed.Smith@Williamsoncc.edu
Assistant Professor:
Steve W. Griffin MAOL (IP)
Email: steve.griffin@williamsoncc.edu
Williamson College is an institution of higher education that offers both graduate and undergraduate programs. The college equips, or prepares, students to be on mission in the world for Christ by teaching a curriculum that integrates faith with education. 
Course Description
This course will explore the various risks that businesses face daily. Dealing with Business Risk (BR) can be challenging for those who do not have a reliable moral and ethical foundation; hence, a Biblical basis for evaluating BR is emphasized throughout the course. Among the topics studied are contract law, insurance risk (warranties and indemnification), human resources and employment law, corporate finance, cybersecurity, operational risks, etc. Managing the tension between risk, innovation, and investing in various organizations will prepare the student for successful managerial leadership.
Student Learning Outcomes
Upon completion of this course, students should be able to:
Demonstrate an understanding of the risks associated with managing and leading an organization.
Demonstrate a general knowledge of how to recognize early warning signals of BR, how to mitigate these risks, and when and how to report BR.
Identify situations and issues that warrant seeking professional assistance in managing and leading an organization.
Be conversant in discussing various risks with employees, peers, and other professionals.
Express an understanding of the differences in legal and regulatory risks vs. routine business risks.
Required Resources
Required Texts:
Girling, P. X. (2013). Operational risk management: A Complete Guide to a Successful
Operational Risk Framework. John Wiley & Sons.
Griffin, S. W. (2025). The Architecture of Coherent Risk “The Human Foundations of Effective Risk Management”
Optional Texts:
Griffith, K. S. (2023). The leader’s guide to managing risk: A Proven Method to Build Resilience and Reliability.
Gigerenzer, G. (2014). Risk savvy: How to Make Good Decisions. Viking Adult.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking fast and slow. Macmillan.
Li, R. (2023). Risk management for small businesses: 7 Effective Strategies to Understand, Identify and Navigate Risks That Will Make or Break Your Business
Evaluations and Grading
The College's standard grading system will evaluate students in this course. Refer to the Student Handbook or the College Catalog for further details. The criteria for determining that grade will be as follows: 
(30%) Successful completion of reading and writing assignments. All learning assessments are to be submitted online in Populi and are part of the student's official academic record.
(30%) Participation in class discussions and activities - The requirements will be the quality and quantity of engagement and contribution to group activities and class discussions.
(30%) Final Exam Assignments – Refer to Introducing the Final Paper Assignments for how the Final Paper is to be completed. The Final Paper will be submitted in Populi within fourteen (14) days after the final class meeting.
(10%) Student Learning Outcome Assessment Assignment.
Assignments submitted late may affect a student’s final grade.
Course Schedule
Written assignments and class presentations:
PowerPoint Presentation:
Using the list below, students will be assigned a particular topic in which to prepare a PowerPoint presentation using scholarly publications and credible reference material (i.e., books, articles, and peer-reviewed journals). The presentations must be written using APA (7th ed.) format, be 8-10 slides in length, and be designed to last approximately 20 minutes when delivered to the class. The body of each slide should consist of 3-5 bullet points with detailed discussion commentary listed in the speaker's notes section. Students must upload their slide presentations into Populi before the beginning of class Week 6.
Risk Topics for PPT Presentation:
Contractual 
Governance
Cyber Security/ Technology 
Insurance
Financial 
Operational
Geo-Political 
Regulatory
Final Exam:
Final Exam Essay (Option 1):
Read the Harvard case study on Colonial Pipeline Cyberattack and write an APA-style paper that answers the questions listed in the accompanying final exam instruction sheet. The paper must be written with a biblical worldview using APA style (7th ed.) and be a minimum of 10 pages (excluding cover page, abstract, reference page, and appendix). The assignment is due within 14 days following the end of the last class period and should include at
least three (5) scholarly sources other than the case study file. 
Attendance
Students are expected to attend every class session of each course in which they are enrolled. Any class missed must be made up in some manner with all required assignments still performed and turned in on time. The student is obligated to contact the Professor to make suitable arrangements in case of any absence or tardiness, especially to get a Zoom recording setup. Unexcused absences and absences not made up will adversely affect the student's grade. Unexcused absences in two (2) class periods will result in an automatic course grade of "F" with no tuition refund, and the student will be required to repeat the course.
Late Submissions
Students should avoid late assignment submissions. Unless excused by the Professor, student work will receive an automatic penalty of one full letter grade for the first day the assignment is late and a 5-point reduction per day for up to five days. Any work turned in after that, or not at all, will warrant a failing grade.
Academic Integrity
Students at Williamson College are expected to maintain academic integrity consistent with biblical truths and accepted protocol in higher education. Therefore, students will not participate in cheating, plagiarism, or any other form of academic dishonesty.
All academic work that a student submits is to be their original work. When a student places their name on a document to submit for grading, they are saying that all the work not otherwise identified as the work is their own. A student must separate verbatim statements gleaned from the Internet or any published or unpublished work that they include by appropriate formatting (quotation marks) and documentation (complete references to the work cited)—submitting as one's work anything prepared in whole or part by another person (for example, another student's paper or a paper secured on the Internet) is plagiarism. It is necessary to give credit and proper documentation to identify the originator of the words, data, or ideas (including facts, statistics, or other illustrative materials), even if the material is wholly paraphrased. 
	The references cited must give clear credit to the source following APA 7 (American Psychological Association) guidelines. Williamson introduces incoming students to the institutional policy on academic integrity during Orientation. Each syllabus will contain an explanation of the policy on academic integrity and the procedure for applying it. In addition, each instructor will elaborate on the policy and explain the procedure that guides persons who engage in violations. 
	Finally, the Williamson librarian will be available to speak with classes about the appropriate uses of learning resources. Instructors who discover work they suspect violates this policy will ask for a face-to-face meeting with the student to clarify the issue. If a student has violated the academic integrity policy, the instructor will speak with the Chief Academic Officer (CAO) to verify if the student has a previous offense. If this is the first offense, they will receive an "F" for that assignment. The student must do remediation with the Williamson librarian, who will guide them in redoing the work. The grade for the course will be decreased by one letter grade. The instructor will submit a written report of the incident to the CAO, who will place the instructor's report in the student's Permanent Record. A second violation in the same or any other course will be handled similarly but will automatically result in a failing grade ("F") for the course. The student may seek the instructor's approval to resubmit appropriate work for a change of grade. The instructor will submit a written report of the incident to the student's Permanent Student File. If a student is discovered in a third violation, they will be expelled immediately.
Professor Profiles
Edward M. Smith, Ph.D.
Dr. Ed Smith has focused much of his career on mentoring leaders to understand underlying organizational culture, helping them create an appropriate transition strategy and get on the right path to achieve their objectives. With more than 25 years of background in commercial banking and with church and non-profit organizations, he is an expert at managing organizational change. 
	Prior to serving as President of Williamson College, Ed was the founder of Oxygen for Leaders, an executive coaching and consultancy organization. He holds an M.B.A. from the University of Kentucky and a Ph.D. in Organizational Leadership from Regent University. His career experience and education have been excellent preparation for leading a diverse student body that engages in rigorous academic study from a distinctively Christian worldview perspective. 
	An avid mountaineer, Ed has coordinated and led a leadership development trek that reached the base camp of Mt. Everest in 2005 and 2008. At nearly 18,000 ft. in altitude, Everest Base Camp is the staging area for climbers attempting to summit Mt. Everest, the world’s highest peak. He and his wife, Kay DeKalb Smith, live in Franklin, Tennessee. They have two married daughters and five grandchildren.
Steve W. Griffin
Mr. Griffin  is a serial entrepreneur who has started and grown businesses in healthcare, entertainment, technology, financial services, retail sales and restaurant operations. Alongside his entrepreneurial work, he has devoted much of his career to teaching, writing, and mentoring leaders in the areas of authentic communication, leadership formation, and character-centered decision-making. His work focuses on helping individuals and organizations align beliefs, language, and action in order to build trust, clarity, and coherence in complex environments.
As Chair of the School of Business at Williamson College, Steve brings extensive real-world leadership experience into the classroom, integrating communication theory, narrative intelligence, and ethical formation with practical application. He is particularly interested in how words shape culture, influence outcomes, and either build or erode credibility over time. His teaching emphasizes the formation of communicators who are not only effective, but trustworthy.
An apprentice of the words and ways of Jesus, Steve seeks to let this apprenticeship guide his life, leadership, and approach to teaching. He is a graduate of Baylor University, where he earned a B.B.A. in Business, and holds a master’s degree in Organizational Leadership from Williamson College. Steve is married to his wife, Deborah, and they have two children and nine grandchildren. He lives in Franklin, Tennessee and continues to work at the intersection of education, enterprise, and leadership development.